
Mashable

Header_share_logo.v2 Header_logo.v2.us Mobile_logo_v2_white_on_black
Mobile_logo_v2_black_on_white <http://mashable.com/>
What 6 survivors of homelessness want you to know
What 6 survivors of homelessness want you to know
Mariah Holmes
Lexx Thomas
Charles Hardigree
Ivan Throckmorton
Patricia Jackson
Aja Monet
2.6k
Share
Tweet

Surviving homelessness

What 6 people who've been there want you to know

by Rebecca Ruiz & Kate Sommers-Dawes

<http://mashable.com/category/mashable-spotlight/>

Surviving homelessness

What 6 people who've been there want you to know

by Rebecca Ruiz & Kate Sommers-Dawes

<http://mashable.com/category/mashable-spotlight/>

The home is sacred — a practical and spiritual shelter that sustains life. 

Yet, every year more than 3 million Americans, many of them children,
lose that sanctuary and become homeless, according to the National Law
Center on Homelessness & Poverty. They turn car seats into makeshift
beds, find temporary respite at crowded shelters, sleep on concrete
under garbage-bag tents. 

These scenes are so familiar that homelessness in America can seem
incurable. In San Francisco, where estimates indicate at least 6,600
people are homeless, finding an affordable and permanent place to call
home in the city's exorbitant housing market is increasingly akin to
winning the lottery. Those grueling odds exact a physical and emotional
toll on the people who endure them. 

These scenes are so familiar that homelessness in America can seem
incurable.

As part of the SF Homeless Project <https://sfhomelessproject.com/>, a
collaborative effort between more than 70 news outlets, /Mashable/
interviewed six people whose lives have been touched by the powerful
forces that created widespread homelessness just a few decades ago.

That crisis, says John McGah, an expert on homelessness and a senior
associate at American Institutes for Research, is a modern phenomenon
born of major economic and social trends that emerged in the past 40
years. Before then, systemic homelessness as we know it did not exist.

If you understand homelessness only through complaints about panhandling
and encampments, or efforts to teach people without homes how to code,
that history may come as a surprise. 

The unraveling began in the 1970s, when the federal government started
slashing its spending on affordable housing by billions of dollars, just
as household incomes began to stagnate. Meanwhile, the value of welfare
benefits decreased steadily over the same two decades. By the 1990s, the
country's housing market had lost one million affordable housing units,
but millions of people had become low-income renters. 

Patricia Jackson, a longtime San Francisco resident, lost her home after
her husband suddenly died.

As the federal government significantly reduced funding for affordable
housing, it also failed to deliver on a promise to aid thousands of
people transitioning from psychiatric institutions to communities around
the country. This was a process known in the 1970s and 1980s as
"deinstitutionalization."

Many of those patients, who lived with mental illness, became homeless,
as did returning Vietnam War veterans. The devastating effects of
institutional racism also continued to keep many minority families out
of white middle-class neighborhoods, and contributes to the
overrepresentation of minorities, particularly black people, in the
homeless population.

"Combine any one of those, or all of those, with an individual's own
vulnerabilities — no health insurance, a car accident, a family breakup,
a health situation — and now you're really vulnerable to these trends,”
says McGah. "And that's a deadly combination.”

Matt Schwartz, president and CEO of the California Housing Partnership,
a nonprofit organization that advocates for affordable housing, says
it's time for the public perspective on homelessness to evolve.

"Until we can change our thinking about housing — that it's got to be a
right, not a market good — we're not going to have the outrage that's
required to change our priorities," he says.

Until we can change our thinking about housing ... we're not going to
have the outrage that's required to change our priorities.
MATT SCHWARTZ, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CALIFORNIA HOUSING PARTNERSHIP

To McGah and Schwartz, the problem of homelessness has an obvious
solution: provide people with permanent affordable housing, and when
necessary, give them supportive services that address mental illness,
addiction and chronic unemployment. 

Not all people who are homeless experience these conditions, but some do
as a direct result of losing shelter. Providing secure housing to people
with different needs and backgrounds across the country is complicated,
experts say, but not impossible.

The following interviews, which have been excerpted and lightly edited,
illustrate the vital importance of housing. Collectively, these six San
Franciscans survived more than two decades of homelessness, thanks in
part to aid from several local nonprofit organizations.

Their stories share common themes, but demonstrate how the individual
experience of homelessness defies simple stereotypes. 


    Mariah Holmes

Mariah Holmes, 25, with her 4-month-old daughter Cassidy at Homeless
Prenatal Program in San Francisco.

/Mariah, 25, has been working with Homeless Prenatal Program, a San
Francisco nonprofit, since she learned of her pregnancy. She's taking
parenting classes and searching for permanent affordable housing for
herself, her partner and their 4-month-old daughter Cassidy./

I found out I was pregnant at about four-and-a-half months and got back
on methadone, and that's what I've been doing. On Dec. 31, we got into
Hamilton Family Center <https://hamiltonfamilycenter.org/> and we got
into our own bed, one of the six-month beds. And our out-date from there
is coming up July 1, which is hectic. There's a lot going on. We don't
have anywhere to move to. We have money saved up, but I’m not trying to
spend it all on a hotel. 

Even so, even the cheap motels, half of 'em don't accept kids 'cause of
the environment and stuff. We got a subsidy [from Hamilton Family
Center], but we've been calling all over, and so many places don't work
with third-party checks — they just have a bad image of subsidies and
stuff. It sucks to generalize people rather than taking people on as an
individuals, and giving them a chance to prove that they can keep it up.

I just want to create a safe, stable environment for my kid.
Mariah Holmes, 25

Rather than being judged on the fact that I had a rocky start, have been
struggling with keeping myself sober and stuff, I’d rather be looked at
for the fact that I'm seeking help and I'm trying to get on my feet. I'm
trying to do what any person, whether they have an addiction or not, is
trying to do when they have a kid. I love her a lot, and I'm just trying
to figure it out.

I'm willing to do whatever it is that I need to. I'm not asking for a
handout. I'm willing to work and I just want to create a safe, stable
environment for my kid. I've got a lot of love to give and I got a lot
of ambitions, and now I finally have the drive to achieve some of those
ambitions with having her there. Now it’s about more than just me.

//
/To support Mariah, email sfhousing@homelessprenatal.org
<mailto:sfhousing@homelessprenatal.org>. Click here
<http://www.homelessprenatal.org/donate> to support Homeless Prenatal
Program. /


    Lexx Thomas

Lexx Thomas at Golden Gate Assembly of God Church.

/Lexx was homeless for four years before he moved into a supportive
housing apartment in 2013 through a San Francisco nonprofit called
Delivering Innovation in Supportive Housing (DISH). He now has his
sights set on getting back into the workforce./

When I realized that [one year] had passed [living here], something
empowering came over my heart just to know that if I can make it in San
Francisco, I can make it anywhere. It just gave me so much strength to
know that I’m not weak, and I am a survivor and a strong person. About a
year-and-a-half later, [I had] stable and permanent housing.

Upon completion of my 55-day [rehab] program, I had a housing
coordinator for San Francisco really, really push me to make the
appointments with the housing managers, and [that's] how I was able to
get housed. They were able to push me to my potential.

For myself, it's even a challenge to try to maintain the mental health
that I do have to do the best that I can, no matter what. [The
challenge] used to be to look around and have nothing but compassion for
the people on the street. Today I’m in a position not to only have
compassion, but to be able to have a voice and to have able hands to do
something about it. That's the difference between then and today for me.

/Click here <http://www.dishsf.org/get-involved> to support Lexx or DISH./


    Charles Hardigree

Charles Hardigree, in his apartment in San Francisco, says he's "one of
the lucky ones."

/Charles, 56, lost his job and was homeless for six months. He was
hospitalized and entered rehab before moving into DISH supportive
housing in 2009./

It can happen to anybody, but it happened to me. Like everybody else I
lived in the suburbs, driving a minivan, working every day and lost my
job. Place went out of business, and then my health fell, and, you know,
just everything come down at once. My health went bad and, next thing
you know, you ain't got a place to live, you know? 

One thing I noticed is out there on the streets, [a lot] of the people
out there have mental problems. It’s really sad and, to me, they
shouldn’t be out there. A lot of them should be at least under a
doctor’s care ... It's not their fault, and that’s the worst thing I
see. I just think it's wrong [in] a country with so much.

It can happen to anybody, but it happened to me.
Charles Hardigree, 56

When you walk by and you see a guy panhandling or going to the garbage
can or things like that, you just got to remember — that's a human being
and, for better or worse, whatever the situation is, he didn’t really
choose to be there, you know? I don’t know what the answer is, but
there’s got to be something better than what we got. Believe me — I've
sat there and I’ve looked and I've thought and I’ve pondered on that
issue, and I don’t know what the answer is, 'cause everybody's
different, a different case.

I never thought, you know, I had a good livin'. I was comfortable like
everybody else. I lived in a nice part of town. Four-bedroom house,
two-car garage, a fenced-in yard, the whole nine yards. It can go like a
flash.

/Click here <http://www.dishsf.org/get-involved> to support Charles or
DISH./


    Ivan Throckmorton

Ivan Throckmorton, in his apartment, where "It's been a good life."

/Ivan, 56, worked as a pastry chef before experiencing homelessness.
He's had stable housing since 2009 through DISH, and has received
treatment for alcohol abuse and mental illness./

I went down, really far and fast. By this time my mental illness was
like — I was hearing voices and was delusional. So I got off the bus [in
San Francisco] and just started floatin' around, sleepin’ outside. It
was cold, too, at that time. I didn’t have a jacket or anything. So I
started staying in winter shelters and day shelters. After that, I got
into a program called South of Market Mental Health
<http://ppf.ucsf.edu/south-market-mental-health-services>. I started
getting help with a therapist and a psychiatrist. They finally put me on
meds. That sorta straightened me out for a little bit.

I haven't been on the streets for six years. I go to those [Alcoholics
Anonymous] meetings every day, and it's been good. Life has been good.
I'm learning how to spend time with myself. I've developed friendships
with people, which I never really had before. 

I really like being alive. For a long time I thought dying was my only
option.
Ivan Throckmorton, 56

I've got regrets, like my family. My ex-wife and two kids are kind of
out of my life. They couldn't deal with my mental illness problems, so
they kind of dislodged me from their life. But I'm OK with that now,
too. It's like I've come to terms with it, and I don’t hold any grudges
and I’m not resentful or anything.

I really like being alive. For a long time I thought dying was my only
option. That's what I thought it was. I thought it was my only option.
Waking up every day I think, jeez, I'm still alive.

Took me some years and a lot of talking to get through it. I'm quite
content with what I have now. I've got a nice, comfy room, and I've got
everything I need.

/Click here <http://www.dishsf.org/get-involved> to support Ivan or DISH./

Ivan's meeting schedule for Alcoholics Anonymous.


    Patricia Jackson

Patricia Jackson at her studio apartment. She'll celebrate two years of
secure housing this summer.

/Patricia, 56, lived in automobiles and shelters for seven years. She's
lived in a DISH studio apartment for two years./

I came to San Francisco in 1984. They transferred my husband's job here,
and that's how I got here. He worked for the airline United, and they
transferred him from Chicago to here. I lived on Divisadero and
California Street for 15 years. I lived on Bridgeview for about seven
years, and I lived on Mendell. That's where I was living when my husband
passed. He dropped dead of a massive heart attack [in 2007], and from
there I became homeless.

I stayed in shelters, I stayed with people — all kinds of stuff. I had a
mental breakdown. I was in the hospital for a while. I never had to
sleep on the street, though, thank God. 

I stayed with a lot of people, here and there — you get to a place where
it’s like time to go, I wore my welcome out. I stayed in cars and vans
for years. Then my mobile home got towed. That’s when I began going
through the shelter system, wherever they'd take me. That wore me out.
It wore me completely out. 

I’m not pitiful; I’m just homeless — me and a whole lot of other people.
Patricia Jackson, 56

Some of 'em you've got to get up and leave and come back later on. You
have to find something to do all day. Riding the bus, riding the train,
sitting in restaurants, eating slow — all kinds of stuff you do to make
time pass, till it's time to go back in the shelter. I see it every day.
It hurts my heart — I've been there and done that.

A lot of people, they knew me before I became homeless, and they knew me
after I became homeless. I'm still the same person I was, but they
didn't see it like that. Some people felt sorry for me. I didn't need
nobody to feel sorry for me, I really didn't. Some people looked at me
like they couldn’t figure out why I was homeless. They just didn’t see
me as the same person as I was when I had somewhere to stay.

They looked at me all pitiful. I'm not pitiful; I’m just homeless — me
and a whole lot of other people.

/Click here <http://www.dishsf.org/get-involved> to support Patricia or
DISH./


    Aja Monet

Aja Monet at Aunt Charlie's Lounge, popular for its drag shows.

/Aja, 46, has been a DISH tenant for four years. He was homeless for two
years before that, and actively participates in his community. /

I stayed in the Tenderloin area for like two years; I volunteered for
Glide <http://www.glide.org/> for a long time. People didn't know I was
homeless, though, because when I went to sleep I would always go
downtown somewhere. I wouldn’t stay in this area.

Even when I was going to jail and [was] deep in my addiction and on
parole and all that, I still had my ear to politics. I would be on
parole and I would still go down to City Hall and participate. I'm on a
couple of boards in the neighborhood. I'm on the HIV prevention council.
I have always believed that my gift in this life is to help ease our
community problems by listening and by lending an active hand whenever I
can. 

When I was homeless, I always tried to think positive and I went to
places like the self-help center <http://hospitalityhouse.org/> and the
Stonewall Project <http://www.stonewallsf.org/> — that's who got me into
[supportive housing]. I went around places like that. I just got on the
list to have a case manager. 

I started going to self-help groups, and harm reduction groups, and
Black Brothers Esteem
<http://sfaf.org/client-services/black-brothers-esteem/>. 

As long as I'm able to open my door and lie down in my room, I'm happy.
Aja Monet, 46

The thing is, plenty of times I would want to say, 'Man, I’m so sick of
this, I just want to get my rent deposit and just give up my place.' If
I give this up, where would I go? I'd spend my money and go out and have
a good time for a couple of hours, and then I'd be in the same rut. 

[My home] could be the worst place in the world, which it's not. It’s a
great place to live and I just love it, and they’re very supportive. The
management and the desk clerks — I just love them to death. As long as
I’m able to open my door and lie down in my room, I’m happy.

/Click here <http://www.dishsf.org/get-involved> to support Aja or DISH./

Share this story
Share
Tweet

  *

    Reporting

    Rebecca Ruiz and Kate Sommers-Dawes
  *

    Photography

    Andrew Burton
  *

    Photo Director

    Dustin Drankoski
  *

    Product Manager

    Prerna Singh
  *

    Social Good Editor

    Matt Petronzio

